[Music]
something different today
i've done one of these response videos
before i did one all the way back when
dave rubin and jordan peterson actually
spoke to
euron brooke so it was very very
interesting that discussion
today i'm going to be talking about a
recent debate that douglas murray had
and i did not disagree with the
sentiments that douglas was expressing
but i thought that some of them were
worth refining
and sharpening up in light of certain
kinds of developments in philosophy we
might say that have happened
over the last few decades now
just before i begin the main part of
this video
i wanted to emphasize the respect i have
for
douglas murray i think he is one of the
most courageous
speakers of our age willing to say
things that
other people won't say for fear of
reputational damage
career-ending comments loss of
opportunity
loss of friends loss of face loss of
respect the list is long
of reasons why people will not speak up
on these issues
that douglas is willing to put his neck
on the line for
so none of what i say here is at all a
deep
criticism of douglas and the way in
which he conducts himself i
am a great admirer of douglas in this
respect my purpose here is merely to
try to refine perhaps clarify i think
what his
underlying intent might be and i'm not
saying he subconsciously holds these
ideas but rather
the ideas that he does hold need to be
refined and i that they are good ideas
coming from a somewhat deeper place than
perhaps you can get across in a short
interview or a short debate such as this
one
indeed this format is not the greatest
way in which to get across these ideas
at times
reading his book is the best way to try
and understand douglas's sentiment
and i think his the sentiments expressed
in his book the strange death of europe
will indeed mirror my own when looked at
in sufficient detail
in discussions on migration people
moving across borders the thing that is
left out in many of these kind of
discussions
is the fact that it's not the fact that
certain people
are crossing the borders but rather that
ideas are crossing the borders now one
might think that this is splitting hairs
but it's not
it's not splitting hairs because
confusion about
the difference between people crossing
borders
versus ideas crossing borders leads to
certain conclusions which are
i would say misdirected now even in
someone
as wise and with whom i normally have
furious agreement with
douglas murray douglas was quite
animated
in his concern about the sheer numbers
and in fact this is a theme
in his book the strange death of europe
he talked very much about the
rate at which people were coming
a questioner in the audience posed
what at first seemed to me like a silly
question
posed the question about how the rate of
change of things
recently has continued to accelerate
across all areas
and for example we all know that
technology for example
is causing the rate of change in culture
and in society to accelerate
and so he wondered how is it any
different if the
sheer number of migrants crossing
borders is any different to that
and one to douglas of if
there was a theme earlier amongst the
rate of change um
you raise the point of the five percent
in the uk in the with the normans
is it not just changing that
everything's changing really quickly
nowadays
and so if there's a lot of change with
immigration uh we've got smartphones now
and we didn't have that 20 years ago so
it's uh it all washes out all comes out
in the wash
um fine let me answer yes that's a very
interesting question it is possible
we do of course live in in a time of
extraordinary change the technological
change that the question has just
rightly referred to is perhaps the most
fundamental of all in the era that's
gone unaddressed this evening
uh the extraordinary benefits and
negatives of living in an era where
we all have access to all of the
information in the world
at the top of the finger it's an
enormous blessing and
it brings a lot of problems and uh yes
there is
there is an extent which you can say
that i would say that however um
churn of populations that is significant
population change is one of the most
significant changes we
we know this and we talk about it
historically uh when um
large movements of people happen in
history we we
who write about history reflect on them
still
there are things like the huguenot
movement in the 17th century to my own
country
which is still talked about uh that was
a relatively small movement of people
but it's mentioned uh because it was it
was it was quite an important thing at
the time albeit only 50 000 people there
so it's true that these things have all
sped up it's true that the the question
of migration
we haven't really got on to it tonight
at all but but the question of migration
is
a complex one it isn't simply something
like
open borders versus right-wing populists
it
is one that as i i say in the in strange
death of europe goes down the heart of
each one of us as well as down the heart
of our society it's an exceptionally
complex question
but as i say i go back to this point
that that even with everything else
that's changing in the world
the uh the population change is
the most long lasting such change
because people are not all the same they
don't all bring the same ideas they
don't bring the same culture they don't
bring the same
religions or anything else and and there
are upsides to that and downsize to that
as i said earlier you can deprecate it
or praise it but most of us think that
it's a
it's a somewhat mixed bag douglas was
right
to pause at this and to be concerned
that there's a
qualitative difference between the two
between
technological change in a society on one
hand
and cultural change upon the other
here's the difference
there really is a difference between
cultures who have traditions that remain
the same over time
and cultures that have traditions that
protect
change over time or indeed encourage
change over time this is one of the
great dichotomies that david deutsches
explained in the beginning of infinity
there are societies the overwhelming
majority of which have existed
throughout history
that we might call static societies
societies that resist change or that
change
so little that during any one person's
lifetime
very little difference can be told from
one day to the next
or one year to the next but our society
is something different it is not a
static society it is something called
a dynamic society in david deutsch's
nomenclature
and a dynamic society is one in which
allows for
progress which is stable
over time that great changes can occur
and yet the society remains stable
what's the difference one of the
differences
is that traditionally if you like
tradition is about maintaining the
status quo
one mechanism a society has or a culture
has
for maintaining the status quo is to
ensure that
the existing practices and the existing
ideas and behaviors in that society
are not criticized or insofar as they
are criticized they are criticized in
such a way
that it forces them to remain in place
in the form they have
or rather insofar as criticism exists in
such societies
that our creative capacity for changing
our ideas exists in static societies
that what that ability to criticize is
used for
is to criticize existing structures such
that they are entrenched
ever more deeply that the behaviors
are adhered to ever better
this is how one shows their virtue in
such societies
consider any ancient religious society
in any ancient religious society the
people there
had much the same brains as we do
similar kinds of minds to the extent
that
they were creative and they could be
critical
but now if there are rituals they need
to enact if they're in a static society
the ritual itself will change very
little
but in order to show your virtue in such
a society
in order to show your worth you will
defer to the ritual
in ever better ways and ever more strict
and disciplined ways that's how you will
use your creativity
and show that you're a virtuous person
this is the hallmark of many static
societies
that the creative ability of our minds
is not used to create something new but
to
keep in place the existing practices
this is the sign of a static society a
society which
rejects criticism of existing practices
and uses it instead
to ever more vigorously defend the
existing practices
now the enlightenment
had perhaps in david deutsche's view the
defining characteristic
of creating a tradition not of
maintaining the status quo not of
trying to adhere to present practices
ever more closely but
rather enabling criticism to flourish
across
all areas of society to promote
in his words a tradition of criticism
and traditions of criticism mean that it
becomes safe
to criticize any idea behavior or
practice within that society
and so now we come to present day
and when we are concerned about people
crossing borders
the target of our concerns is
misdirected
what we're actually concerned about is
the ideas that cross borders
and one kind of idea in particular
the idea that says you should not
criticize
this idea that idea this practice that
practice
because when that kind of idea starts to
gain a foothold in a society
then it spreads across the entire
society
through all ideas it becomes what's
called an
anti-rational mean an anti-rational meme
is an idea essentially
that holds itself immune from criticism
we want to be able to improve all ideas
we want to improve all of our behaviors
the practices the cultural practices we
have in our society
but that becomes increasingly difficult
to do
the more that people think they're not
permitted
to criticize certain ideas it doesn't
matter the sheer number of people that
cross borders
and the traditions of great britain for
example recognize this and recently
the politicians there made the excellent
decision
to allow almost anyone not anyone but
almost anyone from hong kong who wished
to migrate
to the united kingdom to come now
these cultures are different in many
ways
different language different cuisine
different
sporting interests and cultural
interests but there is
one fundamental similarity between the
two cultures
great britain and hong kong and that is
a tradition of criticism
in hong kong you are free until recently
you were free
to criticize the government to criticize
cultural practices to criticize ideas
without fear of being imprisoned without
fear of violence but now
things have changed the chinese
government has
cracked down on the freedom-loving
people of hong kong
and quite rightly britain has said
please come you're free to come and i
think australia has done the same
and quite right too and should hundreds
of thousands of people from hong kong
wish to come to
either of our countries we should allow
them to do so
because we share a belief in freedom we
share
a culture of criticism a tradition
of understanding what criticism is about
uh there are things like the huguenot
movement
in the 17th century to my own country
which is still talked about
uh that was a relatively small movement
of people but it's mentioned
uh because it was it was it was quite an
important thing at the time
with only 50 000 people then okay so
there we have douglas talking about the
huguenots
now is the 50 000 number a big number
well compared to today it's not and this
is douglas's worry and this is douglas's
concern
that we still talk about as in british
people still talk about this movement of
huguenots
now the huguenots were a religious group
they are a religious group
from france who moved from continental
europe
to great britain and just reading from
the wikipedia article it says london
financed the emigration of many to
england and its colonies around
seventeen hundred some forty to fifty
thousand settled in england mostly in
towns near the sea and in southern
districts with the largest concentration
in london where they constituted about
five percent of the population in 1700
okay so should we be concerned that
given that back then the year 1700
50 000 huguenots foreigners
moved from europe to great britain
changing to some extent
the culture of england at the time but
today
we don't have tens of thousands rather
we have hundreds of thousands
are the numbers a concern now we have
certain people that say
open borders is the way to go certain
people on
my side of the ledger to some extent who
believe in
minimal government now there is a
wrinkle in this idea that
government has either very little place
or perhaps even no place
in determining who can come into a
country these are
very minority views that there should be
no borders whatsoever
but let's consider exactly why a border
is necessary once more it comes down to
the ideas
not the numbers the numbers could be in
their millions
numbers that perhaps douglas would
object to
i come back to the point that it can't
just be
numbers what we're aiming to protect our
societies from
is not sheer numbers of foreign people
it is a certain kind of idea
anti-rational ideas ideas that
refuse to allow themselves to be changed
and indeed
protect other bad ideas from being
changed because they
disable the critical faculties of their
holders
this is what an anti-rational meme is
anti-rational means for example include
something like
you must not criticize my god or
anything my god has said in their holy
book and if you do
we will kill you for it now this kind of
idea
which is well subscribed to by some
people
or an idea similar to this that if you
desecrate criticize ridicule
certain holy books then the penalty for
that is
death this has a chilling effect
not merely upon talking about that holy
book
not merely upon talking about that god
or that religion
but it causes people to be extremely
concerned about
talking about anything to that might
have
any point of contact with that religion
or with that holy book
and so anti-rational memes like this
that say you must not criticize this
thing
also cause other people who might be
fearful to not criticize a whole bunch
of other things as well
for fear they could make a mistake
according to that religion according to
that set of anti-rational ideas
i'm not saying that all of religion
consists of anti-rational ideas
not by a long shot much of religion
instantiates important inexplicit
knowledge
that helps to maintain a stable society
over time
and in fact in certain traditions
enables us to have a
tradition of criticism it also provides
for that
that's a separate issue but we must
recognize that there do exist
traditions out there that consist in
large part
at the present time as they have in the
past of
anti-rational memes these are the ones
that we want to protect
our societies from we want to protect
our own minds from these things
we can't be perfectly successful at that
everyone is walking around
with anti-rational means of their own
making
of their education that they were
brought up with
it is very difficult to identify them
all
but because we know the dangers of
antirational memes
they're the things that cause people
personal pain in their own life
they're the things that cause damage to
a society they're the things that
slow down progress in a society
we have enough of them already we don't
want to go importing
even more of them and so it isn't about
the numbers of people after all we could
have
vast numbers of people coming from the
united states to great britain or vice
versa
there'd be very little cultural
difference there
and as i said earlier you can have vast
numbers of people coming from
hong kong for example to the united
kingdom
and it wouldn't be a danger to the
united kingdom
but can there be ideas that are a danger
to the united kingdom
absolutely anyone who comes with the
idea
that the democratic institutions of the
united kingdom are evil
and that should be torn down replaced
with a theocracy say
then that idea is a danger and anyone
who holds that idea
should not be permitted entry into the
country
now that seems like a strong statement
but it has absolutely nothing to do
with who the person is what culture
they're from
nothing to do with that it has to do
with their personal
ideas they can change their ideas but
they need to change their ideas before
they come into
a tradition of criticism into a culture
which respects
criticism and if the more of those
ideas that we have individual
instantiations of those ideas
people who hold those ideas the more
difficult it is
to maintain that tradition of criticism
and therefore to maintain
the democratic institutions and to
maintain
the other institutions that enable us to
remain
stable despite rapid progress and that's
what we want rapid progress
and any time we have vast numbers of
people with bad ideas we slow down the
rate of progress
people like to call people like to call
a willingness to have open borders let's
say progressive
but in fact it's exactly the opposite it
can
cause regression it can cause a society
to become concerned about criticizing
certain ideas
a society to become more fearful more
violent
because more and more people within that
society
refuse to allow criticism
great britain has a long-standing
tradition
of criticism of people standing
literally on soapboxes
in speaker's corner in hyde park
standing up and delivering speeches to
anyone who will listen
and it wouldn't matter how crazy these
ideas sound it wouldn't matter how
ridiculous these ideas sound
people were willing to listen and have
always been willing to listen
but now we know we know
that if you were to stand on one of
those soap boxes in hyde park
in speaker's corner there would be
certain things that you could say
that could cause you to be murdered in
london
we know this we saw this recently in
france
that there are certain ideas that you
can espouse
in france which will cause you to be
killed
this is wrong now it is not
due to the sheer number of people
immigrating into france
that's not the issue it's because a
certain
kind of idea has been allowed to
come across those borders in greater and
greater numbers
and it's the ideas that we have to stop
and once they're there
and they're there now they have to be
counted
they have to be changed these people
that hold these ideas
are a danger to that society
they're not a danger to the static
societies from which they came
or the static societies where those
ideas
are promoted those where those ideas
maintain
the stasis of those static societies
they're not a danger there
and that's why they would be better
suited in those static societies
and if they change their minds and think
that it's fine to criticize everything
then they've taken on board the most
important element of being
in a society like ours the willingness
to criticize any idea at all and the
willingness to have any of your ideas
criticized at all
but so long as they hold on to an idea
that says you cannot criticize
x where x is anything at all then they
need to remain in a static society
because that is the
key feature of a static society and it
wouldn't matter if there were two of
those people
or two million of those people it's too
many
on the other hand if the person believes
that anything can be said more or less
within reason we know what we're talking
about when we talk about free speech
that if you are able to criticize it's
the key feature of
free speech by the way free speech means
you're free to criticize anything at all
okay
i think that's missed a lot in the free
speech debate as well it's like oh
should you be allowed to yell fire in a
crowded theater
okay yes if the theater is on fire
should you be allowed to call for
violence okay
these things are edge case concerns
about free speech
really what we're interested in is
should you be allowed to criticize
anything at all
that's the key part should you be
allowed to criticize any religion at all
now if the answer to that at any point
is no that idea has no place in a
society which is governed by a tradition
of criticism because the tradition of
criticism is about
criticizing anything that you like and
the reason for this
is it enables faster and faster progress
the only way to identify
flaws and failures deficiencies in ideas
the ways in which we can improve things
is via criticism and then finding out
where the problems are so that we can
then create new solutions
it isn't simply something like open
borders
versus right-wing populists it is one
that as i
i say in the in strange death of europe
goes down the heart of each one of us as
well as down the heart of our society
it's an exceptionally complex question
so douglas says it's a question that
goes down the heart of each one of us
as well as the heart of our societies
and i couldn't agree more with that
sentiment
but i don't know that he identifies
precisely what that thing is that goes
down the heart
of us and our societies what goes down
the heart of us
is that distinction between a person who
holds the idea
that you are free to criticize any id or
not
and in our societies whether you're a
static or a dynamic society
whether you endorse being in a static or
dynamic society
and that is about whether or not you
have this tradition of criticism
this willingness to embrace the ability
to improve
any idea no matter what it is not
holding immune
certain ideas certain books certain
supernatural beliefs
as being unable in principle to be
improved because it's perfect in some
way
or that you are the possessor of the
ultimate and only
interpretation of those ideas as soon as
you start saying you may not criticize
you may not insult you may not make fun
of you may not draw
certain things then you are not a part
of
this society of this
culture of criticism this tradition of
criticism
this way in which we can ensure
the improvement gradually incrementally
over time of our societies and of our
institutions
of ensuring that progress happens as
fast as possible
and yet in our societies despite the
rapid change the rapid progress
we remain stable because the
institutions we have
are able to course correct when we make
a mistake
when the criticism is misdirected when
the new idea
is a bad idea then those institutions
are able to course correct
and enable us to continue to make rapid
progress
over time and despite despite that
rapid progress we remain stable
this is the tradition that we've had and
we can look to places like the united
kingdom
especially that has remained relatively
stable
for the longest period of time and the
united states that has remained
relatively stable for the longest period
of time
there have not been modulo a few
exceptions over the years
huge revolutions there haven't been huge
changes in the way in which government
operates for example
and so these are the places that we wish
to preserve
because we don't know all the reasons
why
these institutions these governments
these nations
remain stable over time we can look at
all the failed states around the world
and we can point to the reasons why they
fail
one of the reasons why they fail is
specifically for what i've been talking
about
they have anti-democratic institutions
and once you have an anti-democratic
institution
by pauper's lights by the idea that
you the only way of removing the leader
is through violence
because you have a tyrannical government
because you're not able to vote out the
leaders
then once you have that kind of thing in
place then you will get violence
you will get instability and if you have
cultures or traditions or governments
that say you cannot criticize me
your you cannot criticize this tenant
this idea this law
then indeed you will ultimately end up
with violence because
the revolution will come the revolution
the overthrow of the enlightenment
of the western tradition of western
democracies
has not happened and in my opinion will
not happen
because the institutions are robust
enough to ensure
that we can course correct in time and
the overwhelming majority of people
still endorse this idea that anything
can be criticized
now i'm not sure that things couldn't go
south completely
i'm not sure that a majority eventually
won't think that there are
certain ideas in our society that you
cannot criticize
if that happens then hope fades then
we're in trouble
at the moment we're not there i don't
think we're there by any stretch of the
imagination i think there's a lot of
as david deutsch has observed as well a
lot of hyperbole going on out there
there's a lot of people saying that this
is the end times that this is
late capitalism that the
institutions of the united states for
example are ripe for being removed
that uh donald trump is the a sign of
the apocalypse
that the huge migration that's happening
in europe as a sign of the death of
europe
and although i understand a lot of what
douglas murray has to say on this
i don't agree with the ultimate
conclusion i don't think he ultimately
does conclude this he has optimistic
passages in his book by the way so
i'm wrong to say that he is but the
title is actually telling you the
conclusion
there is not going to be a death of
europe
there will be an evolution of europe now
whether or not
in the interim places like europe
go down a road which is more towards
static societies where you are less and
less able
to criticize certain ideas and perhaps
people are elected who refuse to allow
themselves to be criticized whether or
not we go down that road
or whether or not we re learn to
appreciate
and to have great gratitude for the
tradition that we've inherited
namely a tradition of criticism is yet
to be seen
but i'm hopeful so i hope you uh
enjoyed that this is not meant to be a
criticism of douglas murray this is a
reflection upon douglas murray
i have great respect for douglas but i
do think that in any of these
conversations
it is rarely mentioned that the key
factor that we're interested in using
our borders for
is keeping out certain ideas when we
focus on
keeping out particular people then
the accusations begin but it's not
racist prejudiced or discriminatory to
say that certain ideas
should be left at our gates that they
cannot be permitted to come in
that we have enough bad ideas here of
our own and we do not need to bring in
more bad ideas we're trying to improve
our societies
everyone comes with bad ideas everyone
has bad ideas
but there are certain bad ideas that are
so beyond the pale
that we cannot afford to allow them to
gain a foothold in the society that we
have
thanks for that if you enjoyed this then
you can find me on patreon
topcast or brett hall thanks very much
for any support bye
[Music]
you